Hi, this is Scott. I
really appreciate our sponsors because
they make the show possible.
Today's show is sponsored by
developer express, become a UI
superhero with dev express controls
and libraries. Deliver elegant.net solutions
that address customer needs today
by leveraging your existing knowledge,
you can build next generation
touch enabled solutions for tomorrow,
you can download your free
30 day trial@dxdothanselminutes.com. That's dx.hanselminutes.com
. Hi, this is Scott
Hanselman. This is another episode
of Hansel minutes today. I'm
talking with Tara Reed. She
is a ceo@appswithoutcode.com. She's worked
at Microsoft and Google and
to Columbia and all over
the place. And now she
is helping people make apps
without knowing how to code.
How are you? It's pretty
good. Thanks so much for
having me. I'm thrilled to
talk to you because you
know, everyone is out there
saying we should learn how
to code these people, how
to code, and maybe that's
not the right way to
go about things. I mean,
I think more than anything,
we should teach people how
to be great problem solvers
and to really understand logic
and solving problems with logic.
Sometimes that looks like doing
it with code. Sometimes it
doesn't. Yeah, it seems like
we should be teaching people
how to think, you know
what I've done done podcasts
with people about systems thinking,
and that's a way to
think. Absolutely it definitely is.
So I primarily work with
people who self identify as
nontechnical, which, you know, can
mean a lot of different
things, but for primarily for
people who are not proficient
enough in writing code such
that they can, they have
an app idea, but they
can't crank it out immediately
and build it really quickly.
And that could be people
who are really good at
writing code. They just don't
have the time or want
to invest all the time
and building and writing new
code for their idea when
they don't even know if
it's something that people want.
And it could be someone
who totally doesn't know code
at all. Why do people
do people choose to self
identify for like, I don't,
I'm not technical. It's almost
seems like it's a defensive
maneuver. Some sometimes it is
sometimes it's if people feel
insecure about not being technical
in a, in the tech
industry. And so, and I
think a lot of, a
lot of unintentional shame gets
put on people inside of
tech companies who are not
the developers, right? What all
of those roles, all roles
inside of a company are
super important. But I think
that people feel maybe embarrassed
that they don't know how
to write code. And so
they call themselves nontechnical. I'm
not even sure what that
means. Exactly. Cause there are
some pretty technical people who
also don't, you know, are
not developers. So, you know,
I think people sometimes will,
will say that and sort
of put themselves down or
turn it to protect themselves
as an insecurity thing. Yeah.
That's what I've seen. I
wonder why people choose to
do that and where that
started. I mean, I recognize
that people who know how
to code are proud of
it. And I know that
I'm excited to have that,
that sense of empowerment, that
why we have set up
the system by which we
disempower people who can't do
that, as opposed to, I
mean, I think inside of
a tech company, you know,
as you mentioned, I've worked
at some big ones, you
know, there's a hierarchy. It
seems of the people who
work there with developers largely
at the top, particularly at
startups. Right. And I think
that that sort of some
of where it comes from,
but I think that the
negative effect is that people
who are in non developer
roles inside of a company,
then feel like the kind
of critical thinking that comes
with being a developer is
not for them. They can't
do it. And it actually,
I think, ends up biting
the developers in the butt
because then they get asked
all sorts of questions. Some
of them being relatively simple
questions that someone could have
figured out on their own,
or if they had a
little bit of knowledge about
code or about, you know,
just technology in general, they
could've asked a more directed
question. They could've spoke the
developer's language a little bit
better. And I think it
kind of that, that stigma
and that divide between technical
and nontechnical actually prevents us
from really effectively communicating. That's
interesting that you point out
that it's as much about
being technical as it is
about communicating with the technical
people. It's almost like that
frustration with talking to programmers.
It causes one to just
say, ah, I'm not technical.
Absolutely. And you know, so
I run a program it's
called apps, that code bootcamp.
And I mainly work with
people who identify as nontechnical.
And a lot of them
have a lot of fear
around talking to a developer
that developer not understanding what
it is that they were
trying to say. So again,
communication, and then getting a
result from their product. That
just totally wasn't what they
wanted or what they were
trying to communicate and feeling
like they've wasted their money
or their time working with
that person. You know, that's,
that's one of the results
of us having this divide
between technical and nontechnical as
well. So when a non
technical or person who's not
coding, or actually, you know,
I'm just realizing it, it's
not just non technical, but
it's people who may not
have experience in a particular
platform. For example, you might
be listening to this podcast
and you've got 20 years
in technology that you've never
made an iPhone app. Yeah.
Yeah. People who don't have
experience in a particular platform
or people who are validating
an idea and know that
the faster they can validate
that the better off they'll
be. And that includes even
people who have experience in
that particular platform who want
to build in a fraction
of the time, make sure
they can make money from
it. And then, okay, we'll
go back and, and do
the coding work. That's interesting.
How important is it to
validate the idea? I mean,
I assume the point of
validating idea is to, to
know when to bail, cause
you don't wanna, you know,
you see these people on
shark tank that are like,
I've been putting 35 years
in a million dollars and
I mortgaged our house and
then they're off the shark
tank and it's like, that's
so sad. Yeah, absolutely. You
definitely need to know when
to bail, but also like
none of us get our
ideas right. The first time.
And we know this as
well for, for folks who
are listening, who work at
big companies, you definitely know
this. We just don't really
talk about it inside of
company space. So that's why
we continuously iterate on products.
That's why we have support
teams and why support teams
often sort of rotate with
the teams because the engineers
need to see what people
are saying and support tickets
and like, Oh, I didn't
think that this feature would
be really confusing to all
the consumers, but it actually
ended up being really confusing.
You know, all those things,
the same thing happens when
you build a new product
except it's magnified, right. There
could be particular features you
thought were going to be
really, really important. Actually I
remember my first startup that
I launched was called collector
and I thought that it
was an art recommendation service.
And I thought that it
was going to be really
important to, I wanted to
still have a little bit
of a human touch in
there in addition to a
recommendation algorithm. And I wanted
people to be able to
interact somewhat with like a
personal stylist for their walls.
And that was gonna be
so important that people would
be able to video chat
and that we have video
is a really, really critical
component of the platform. And
I couldn't get anyone to
get on video chat. Right.
It just turned out the
people who didn't know much
about art. They were totally
intimidated by the idea of
talking to someone who knew
a lot about art. And
if I had gone out
and spent a lot of
time building the best, you
know, video integrated platform, I
would have totally wasted my
time. So most of us
don't get it exactly right.
The vision we have of
exactly how the product should
look is not spot on
when we first start. And
so there may be tools
you want to use to
just quickly build something. And
when I say quickly, you
know, the tools that I
teach people how to build
apps without code on these
days, developers picked him up,
you know, and even if
in a fraction of the
time. So if you can
build your entire app in
a day or two and
then just get it out
there. And when I say
build, I mean from idea
to push to the app
store in a day or
two, why not make sure
that people want it, you've
got the core features in
place, and then you can
make quick changes as opposed
to, you know, really investing
in a lot of technical
debt. Why do people feel
the need to put something
out that's super polished and
why are people so kind
of ashamed for lack of
a better word of putting
out a website or an
app that isn't clean. It's
almost like when we were
kids and we were told
to write a paper, we're
always ashamed of that first
draft to the point where
you almost deny that it
exists. Absolutely. I mean, all
of us want to look
good, right? Like that's all
centered in just a human
instinct to look good, but
a good friend of mine,
he says, hell is building
fancy stuff that nobody uses.
It's, it's fun. Okay. It
looks really great, but nobody
cares. And that's literally the
worst. But if you were
a product developer and I
don't even, I, you say
product developer, meaning whether you
code or not, you can
still put out products. That's
the worst building, fancy stuff.
Nobody uses The, you've got
a great blog post called
a, my website isn't ready
to launch yet. And you
kind of explore that idea
of that, that self doubt.
It seems like we need
to remind people that fail
fast fail often is how
you get things done these
days. Yeah, absolutely. I don't
know if you guys have
read or folks who are
listening have read outliers by
Malcolm Gladwell. It's actually a
really good illustration of, you
know, the things and the
people that we see as
being really successful are yes,
successful, but for a variety
of reasons, the main one
being that they've just had
a ton of practice her
age and that practice can
be launching something and failing
it and then launching it
again and getting it a
little bit better. But they're
constantly putting themselves out there.
And that extends from like
sports players where there's always
practicing to developers where they're
just like always launching things
or any kind of entrepreneur
really where you're always launching
things and you are not
going to hit that sort
of success space, unless you're
always putting stuff out there.
Some of those things will
be failures and some of
them things, some of the
things will be successes. And
that's how you get there
by just putting a bunch
out there. Sometimes I've heard,
I've seen like medium posts
or blogs where someone says,
you know, put out a
website that's super basic with
a sign up sheet. Even
if the product doesn't exist
in order to gauge interest
in the product. And if
people sign up, then you'll
know, well, a thousand people
signed up, I should definitely,
you know, start building this
thing does that seems like
a powerful life hack, but
it also seems like it
might be a little disingenuous.
No, I think it's really
flat. I do that. And
I, and I instruct people
to do that as well.
And you know, the reason
why is because it, for
it to work, it has
to be accompanied by a
solid marketing strategy is often
the piece, right? A lot
of people say, just build
your website and see if
people sign up. Well, like
that's not really how it
happens, right? Like if you
build a website, you have
to do a lot of
work to get people to
know about your website and
get them to sign up,
right. That's where the marketing
piece comes in and then
you have to leverage. So
what I usually tell people
to do is have people
sign up and get on
the waiting list for your
product. And what it allows
you to do is slowly
take people off of the
waiting list and to kind
of manage your workload. And
when I say slowly, I
mean, literally you can take
people off five people, a
time, 10 people at a
time to use your product.
It also is a smart
marketing strategy because not only
does it manage your workload,
but it also create some
urgency, right? People are like,
Oh, there's a wait list
for this. This might be
cool. And it's, it's smart
from a marketing perspective as
well. So I think it's
a great way to go.
And it allows you to
see if anyone's interested. It
allows you to see like,
is the way I'm describing
this, something that resonates with
people or am I totally
describing it in a way
where no one cares? All
right, let me play around
and tweak the language. Let
me tweak some of the
things that are on the
site and see if I
can kind of get something
that resonates with people a
bit better. And then once
you have people signing up,
then you kind of treat
your signup customers as investors.
I'm a huge advocate for
building products where you charge
people upfront instead of having,
you know, completely freebie app
products. But what you're able
to do is see like,
is anybody gonna pay for
this thing? And then what
you put yourself in as
a position where you don't
have to go begging and
crawling to an investor for
money, because you've used your
customers as kind of some
of your early quote unquote
investors for the price. Interesting.
Someone told me about the
theory of a thousand true
fans. I heard about this,
right? So you were telling
me that your early people,
your early, you know, people
who bet on you and
your idea early, really aren't
just their investors. They are
your fans and they are
the ones that can also
help you potentially pivot if
you need to make a
change. Absolutely, absolutely. So we
hear this term pivot a
lot, and sometimes you see
these things on, on, on
hacker news and you see
it on like Silicon Valley
on that TV show where
these things become buzzwords though.
But you, you, you're not
saying that pivoting is a
bad thing. If you are
going to fail on something.
No, I think pivoting is
a great thing. The one
challenge is I see people
fall into two camps either.
They're not pivoting at all.
So they're just completely stuck
on this one idea that
they have in their head.
And usually those people are
not actually getting much traction
on their idea, whether that's
development, traction, they're just not
getting much built or they're
not getting a lot of
customer traction because they're too
scared to put it out
there. So usually the people
who are really, really attached
to their idea, they're not
making a lot of progress
or there's people who have
heard about this concept of
pivoting and are pivoting like
crazy before they even get
any real customer feedback. Like
every time they get a
new idea, there's a pivot.
And so I think that
both of those extremes are
not where you want to
be. You don't want to
be pivoting every time you
have a new idea. All
of your pivots should be
grounded in some of that
feedback that you get from
your first thousand true fans,
right? If you're seeing really
clear trends on things that
are confusing to people or
things that people want, et
cetera, you should be pivoting
around those, but not just
when you get a new
idea. So it sounds like
whether you're technical or not,
all of the decisions that
you make need to be
kind of rooted in content,
for lack of a better
word, conscious thought, like there
has to be a reason
there has to be data.
There has to be, you
know, research behind the reasons
that you do what you
do. I wouldn't even go
even further to say rooted
in something that multiple customers
have said. Or, and when
I say said, I don't
mean they actually have to
say those words, sometimes customers
of technology products, they don't
know how to articulate what
they want, but they can
tell you by not clicking
on that thing, you want
them to click on, right?
So that's where the data
comes in. But it's mainly
because of something the customer
said, if you use the
word said in a little
bit more of a loose
Now, what about people who
have a co founder? And
they're two people, does it
always need to be like
one bill Gates and one
bomber where one's technical and
one's not, or can tune
on technical founders to work
on a startup idea together.
I think two nontechnical founders
can definitely work on a
startup idea together. And I
think too technical folks can
as well. I think that
what, for me, as an
entrepreneur, what's really important is
to constantly be working with
coaches to develop skills that
I don't have, or that
I'm a little bit weak
on. And sometimes that means
that like I'm bartering with
a friend, right? So I,
for example, am not a
designer and there are designers
on my team. And a
couple of months ago, I
wanted to just have a
better grasp on managing my
designers and be able to
do a better job as
a manager there and as
a CEO. And so I
hired and sort of bartered
with a friend of mine
who used to work on
his name, Zander Pollock, used
to work on the Gmail
team. And he taught me
about the Google ventures, design
sprint. And so I have
a better grasp on what
it looks like to design
a product because I've rolled
up my sleeves and gone
through that process. And I
am not a designer. I'm
not the designated designer on
that team, but it doesn't
mean that I can't learn
design. And that is a
really good way. If you
have two technical people to
nontechnical people where you can
sort of balance some things
out. But I think that
if you are launching a
product, launching a company, you
should always be figuring out
how you can learn things
and bring on coaches for
lack of better word, to
help you with that. Yeah,
but Google ventures, design sprint,
and I'll have links to
all of this in the
show notes, is it gv.com/sprint?
It's aiming to provide a
shortcut because you've got your
idea. You're going to build
your idea, you'll launch your
idea. And then you take
information and you learn, and
then you kind of really
refine that idea. The intent
is with these design sprints
is to tighten that up,
that inner loop and make
it even even quicker. So
what tools do people people
use? I know that you
have a, a, a toolkit
that people can go up
and download. They'll get a
free ebook on apps without
code toolkit. Are you intending
that people use like drag
and drop tools to create
prototypes or are they really
making apps in the, in
the well, in this, in
the sense that I think
about them as it being
applications? Absolutely. So what I'm
talking are people building fully
functioning apps. So not just
prototypes where you click it,
but you can actually save
a database of information, et
cetera. So there are a
couple different types of tools
out there. The one that
I recommend to people who
are a little bit more
on the tech savvy side
is called bubble bubble dot
I S is the website.
And it's definitely the most
robust tool out there at
least right now as we
speak. And, but there are
a ton others, dozens tend
to dozens of others and
bubble has a couple core
tabs. I'll kind of describe
this to you, but you're
welcome to go check out
the website. This is a
bubble dot I S for
people that are listening. Exactly.
And so the, there is
a design tab and that
design tab just looks like
a regular drag drop editor.
So you drag and drop
shapes on the page and
different elements on the page.
And there's some more sophisticated
design work that you can
do there, but it looks
like more or less a
drag and drop interface. And
then there is a database
tab, and this is where
you set up your database,
however you want. So you've
got free reign to set
up the database with whatever
structure that you need, and
you set up your database
too, and you can always
change it there, the data
tab. And then there's a
third tab, which is the
workflow tab. And for the
most part, this is where
the replacement of the code
happens. And I usually tell
people, you know, you're still
programming. You're just doing it
in a different language. Really
what bubble has built is
their own programming language. It's
just in, you know, conversational
English as opposed to anything
else. And so what it
looks like is like a
really, really simple example I
give to beginners is like,
when the user clicks this
button, then log them in.
And it literally says that.
And then it'll ask you
some followup questions where you
put certain, you know, pieces
of information around what happens
when you loved them it,
and to allow them in
using the email that they
typed into the email field,
in the password that they
typed into the password field.
And when you use the
log them in function in
bubble, it already knows that
if it doesn't match up
to the password they have
on file, it will give
a certain, you know, responses,
sorry, that password doesn't match.
We don't have an account
that way, and you can
change the messaging that you
want, but it kind of
has that logic set up.
And so it's just really,
if this, then that logic
and you can get, that's
a really simple example, but
you can get really robust
with this and build algorithms
and all sorts of things
here on the platform. I'm
just using logic, but it's
written in conversational English statements
as opposed to in a
different programming language. Interesting. So
it sounds like for kind
of, you know, classic web
text boxes, over data or
apps with maps and alerts
and the kinds of things
that we see all the
time, this could get, you
know, 80, 90% of the
people, quite, quite a lot
functionality. It's got male champion,
Scott search engines and integrations
all built in. Yeah, absolutely.
And then let's say, for
example, you wanted to plug
in and pull in some
API connections. You can be
that too. So it gets
people, a lot of the
functionality that they have for
really basic apps. And then
there are other tools out
there, like, let's say that
you wanted to build a
video game without code. There's
a tool called stencil that
allows you to do that.
If you wanted to build
artificial intelligence chatbots, there's a
tool called motion.ai. So there
were a couple, you know,
specific functionality kind of tools
that focus on a different
functionality, depending on what you're
trying to do there. And
in there, a lot of
things that you still can't
build without code these days,
right? And by the way,
all of these platforms are
built with code, right? Just
with interfaces that allow you
to build them without code.
So oftentimes I get people
saying like, well, does this
mean that we don't need
code anymore? And like, the
answer is absolutely. That's not
what it means. It just
opens up for, you know,
all the developers out there
who have friends asking them
all the time to build
their app idea. It allows
you to direct them to
a place where they can
get started and make sure
that this is something that
people want on their own.
And then you kind of
come in once it's validated
and ready for you, as
opposed to having all of
your friends, ask you. And
Becky, That is a really
interesting point at the same
time though. How do you,
let's just use you as
an example, you know, you've
launched your businesses, you've pivoted
on some sold some, but
at the same time, aren't
you becoming technical, like maybe
you'll wake up one day
and you'll be a coder
and not even realize it.
If you're using bubbles successfully,
you're probably coding. Now. You're
just not coding in a
language that most people are
familiar with. Yeah, that's absolutely
right. So in a lot
of ways you become technical.
And I think that there
are, when we talk about
technical, whatever, that means, they're
kind of different layers to
that and different degrees with
which you are technical, but
at least you become far
more technical than you once
were. And that allows you
to do as a quote,
unquote, non technical person allows
you to do a lot
of things. One of which
is to take a first
idea for stab of an
idea and a product that
you've built, validate it, and
then bring it to someone
who does write code to
then have them layer on.
And sometimes people have, we'll
continue using a platform like
bubble and other times. So
because you can layer code
on top of it. So
you can layer Java or
some other things on top
of bubble, or you can
create your own API connections
using code. So it's not
just for people who write
code or you can just
completely move off of it
and work on your own
platform. Interesting. Okay. So you're
not necessarily looking at the
internals of HTTP and doing
it, but you know, what
an API is, right. That
sense. So then, you know,
becoming technical can just be,
even being an enthusiast or
someone who knows what MailChimp
is and how MailChimp fits
into a solution without having
to know the internals of
the API that talk to
MailChimp. Absolutely. And I think
that that's, what's happening. The
industry, interesting thing that's happening
in the industry is that
there are a lot of
tools popping up that can
allow you to be technical
without knowing the ins and
outs. Like, for example, if
I want to do web
scraping of a website, there
are clear web scraping tools
that I can use that
don't require me to know
any code. I literally have
click interfaces where I can
click on all the different
elements of a page, set
it up, such that it
scrapes it. And then I
know that there is an
API connection in bubble. I
maybe don't know anything more
than that. I just know
what's called an API. And
what it'll do is it'll
pull in what I just
web scraped into my app.
And that's all I need
to know in order for
that to actually get done
and set up. Right? Yeah.
So, so pulling this all
the way back to the
initial kind of couple of
statements where we talked about
how everyone is out there,
focusing on people, learning to
code, there is a risk
that someone might spend all
this time trying to figure
out what a four loop
is or how HTML works.
But they're missing the big
picture about how, how humans
interact with apps in the
app store and how marketing
is important in business development
and business plans are important
as well. Oh yeah. I
mean, I find that the
developers who join my programs
and boot camps, they're not
coming because they don't know
how to code they're coming
because they realize that even
if they do code the
most perfect app, you know,
it's not going to get
marketed itself. It's not going
to have a soft business
model on its own. And
so those are all equally
important pieces of the puzzle.
On top of that, I
think that there are different
scenarios for learning to write
code if you want to
learn to code, because you're
excited about the intellectual challenge
of it. That's what you
should, you definitely should learn
to write code if you
want to learn code, because
you want to get a
job working at like a
nine to five job working
in tech, and you definitely
should write code. You're not
going to come into the
conversation in the interview saying,
I built apps for that
code. At least it's not
today. And, but if you
have an idea for a
startup and you don't write
code, it does not always
benefit you to go say,
all right, well, I've got
to go learn code because
by the time you get
proficient enough to build a
robust and sophisticated app, the
idea may not be relevant
anymore. Someone else has done
it. And so if you
need speed on your side,
it makes a lot of
sense to you. Some of
these emerging alternatives. Interesting. It
seems like people could get,
could get caught up in
trying to learn to code
and miss the, the forest
for the trees when the,
really the they're trying to
ship a solution, right. Not
know how to code. Right.
And interesting. So people can
get all of your resources@appswithoutcode.com.
You've got a bootcamp, you've
got a blog. You've got
even a Ted talk that
people can watch where it
kind of all this. Yeah,
absolutely. The Ted talk turned
out pretty well. How did
that happen? So I had
been blogging about my experience
building apps without code for
a while. And I think
I had like a hundred
subscribers. I w I was
mainly talking to myself and,
but, but there were people
who were just so enthusiastic
about it and it offered
up an opportunity for them
that they didn't even think
was possible. And so from
that, I got an invitation
to do that TEDx talk.
And after that really got
a lot more feedback on
the idea and a lot
of interest in it good
and bad, right? Like some
people hate this as an
idea, but I think it's
really empowering for most people
more than anything, You know?
And I liked that. You
said empowering. It's actually one
of my favorite words, because
I think that what, what
people who are technical have
or feel, I know I
do is a sense of,
I can do it a
sense of power. And you
know, in this, in this
kind of the state of
the world today, so many
people feel like they don't
have power, whether it be
over their job or their
life or their situation. What's
so fun about being a
techie techie. I want to
include both nontechnical and technical
people, you know, enthusiasts is
that sense of power. And
it sounds like that's what
you're trying to get people
to realize that they are
powerful and they can do
this. Exactly. That's very cool.
Well, thanks so much for
chatting with me today. Absolutely.
Thanks for having me. This
has been another episode of
Hanselminutes and we'll see you
again next week.